Additions to pre print (#16)
Nikoleta-v3/meta-analysis-of-prisoners-dilemma-tournaments: paper/main.tex

game in 1950~\cite{Flood1958}. Following the computer tournaments of Axelrod in the
1980's~\cite{Axelrod1980a, Axelrod1980b}, a strategy's performance in a round
robin computer tournament became a common evaluation technique for newly designed

> strategies. Many tournaments have followed Axelrod's~\cite{Bendor1991, Stephens2002,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strategies. Many tournaments have followed Axelrod's~\cite{Bendor1991, Beaufils1997, Stephens2002,
```

Kendall2007, Stewart2012, Harper2017} and today more hundreds of strategies exist
in the literature.

> Axelrod performed two widely-known computer tournaments~\cite{Axelrod1980a,
> Axelrod1980b} in the 1980's. The
> winner of both tournaments was the simple strategy Tit For Tat (TFT) which cooperated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The
winner of both of Axelrod's tournaments~\cite{Axelrod1980a,
Axelrod1980b} was the simple strategy Tit For Tat (TFT) which cooperated
```

We've already mentioned Axelrod's tournaments above.

properties, which he adapted into four suggestions on doing well in an IPD:

\begin{itemize}
    \item Do not be envious by striving for a payoff larger than the opponent's payoff
    \item Be "nice"; Do not be the first to defect
    \item Reciprocate both cooperation and defection; Be provocable to retaliation and forgiveness
    \item Do not be too clever by scheming to exploit the opponent
\end{itemize}

As a result of the strategy's strong performance in both tournaments, and moreover in a
series of evolutionary experiments~\cite{Axelrod1981}, TFT was often
claimed to be the most robust basic strategy in the IPD.

There are strategies which have built upon TFT and the reciprocity based approach.
In~\cite{Beaufils1997} Gradual was introduced which was constructed to have the
same qualities as those of TFT except one: Gradual had a memory
of the game since the beginning of it. Gradual recorded the number of defections
by the opponent and punished them with a growing number of defections. It would
then enter a calming state in which it would cooperates for two rounds. A
strategy with the same intuition as Gradual is Adaptive Tit for

> Tat~\cite{tzafestas-2000a}. Adaptive Tit for Tat does not keep a permanent
> count of past defections, it maintains a continually updated estimate of the
> opponent's behaviour, and uses this estimate to condition its future actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tat~\cite{tzafestas-2000a}. Adaptive Tit for Tat maintains a continually updated estimate of the
opponent's behaviour, and uses this estimate to condition its future actions.
```

(Technically, the Gradual of Beaufils1997 does not keep a permanent count of past defections either.)

> Other works have built upon the limitations of the TFT, and others have shown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other works have built upon the limitations of TFT, and others have shown
```

> that suggestions made by Axelrod did not necessarily lift to alternative environmental rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that suggestions made by Axelrod did not necessarily apply in alternative environmental settings.
```

punishes a defection, in a noisy environment it can get stuck in a
repeated cycle of defections and cooperations. Some new strategies, more
robust in tournaments with noise, were soon introduced, including
Nice and Forgiving~\cite{Bendor1991}, Generous Tit For Tat~\cite{Nowak1992},
and Pavlov (aka Win Stay Lose Shift)~\cite{Nowak1993}, as well as later
variants such as OmegaTFT \cite{kendall2007iterated}. Introduction of new strategies
is often accompanied by a claim that the new strategy is the best known despite
only being tested against a small number of opponents, or specific classes of
opponents not necessarily representative of all possible or all published strategies.
The lack of testing against formally defined strategies and tournament winners
is understandable given the effort required to implement
\footnote{Implementing prior strategies faithfully is often extremely difficult or impossible
due to insufficient descriptions and lack of published implementations or code.}
the hundreds of published IPD strategies, yet calls into question any claims of superiority
or robustness of newly introduced

> strategies.

Reviewer: I really like this paragraph :+1:

A set of envious IPD strategies were introduced called zero-determinant strategies (ZDs)
in~\cite{Press2012}. By
forcing a linear relationship between stationary payoffs ZDs can ensure that they will
never receive less than their memory-one opponents. While ZDs
were introduced with a small tournament in which some were reportedly
successful \cite{Stewart2012}, this result has not generally held in future
work. In~\cite{Harper2017} a

> series of clever strategies were introduced, and a tournament containing over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
series of strategies trained using reinforcement learning were introduced, and a tournament containing over
```

I'd suggest this is nicer given the way we describe `clever` in the next sentence.

tournament type is Inverse Punisher with 5639 entries. The strategy with the
minimum entries is EvolvedLookerUp 1 1 1 which was selected in 4693 trials.

A result summary (Table~\ref{table:output_result}) has \(N\) number of rows
because each row contains information for each strategy that participated in the
tournament. The information includes the strategy's rank, median score, the rate
with which the strategy cooperated $(C_r)$, its match win count, and the
probability that the strategy cooperated in the opening move. Moreover, the
probabilities of a strategy being in any of the four states ($CC, CD, DC, DD$),
and the rate of which the strategy cooperated after each state. The \textbf{normalised rank}

> feature that is manually added. The rank \(R\) of a given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feature that is manually added. The rank \(R\) of a given. % TODO Clarify how strategies are ranked (see email discussion)
```

    distributions are skewed towards zero except the distributions with
    unrestricted noise, supporting the conclusions from
    Table~\ref{table:top_performances}.}\label{fig:r_distributions}
\end{figure*}

In standard tournaments 10 out of the 15 top strategies are introduced
in~\cite{Harper2017}. These are strategies based on finite state automata (FSM),
hidden markov models (HMM), artificial neural networks (ANN), lookup tables
(LookerUp) and stochastic lookup tables (Gambler) that have been trained using
reinforcement learning algorithms (evolutionary and particle swarm algorithms).
They have been trained to perform well against the strategies
in APL in a standard tournament, thus their performance in the
specific setting was anticipated. DoubleCrosser, BackStabber and Fool Me Once, are
strategies not from the literature but from the APL. DoubleCrosser is an extension
of BackStabber and both strategies make use of the number of turns because they are
set to defect on the last two rounds. It should be noted that these
strategies can be characterised as ``cheaters'' because the source code of the strategies

> allows them to know the number of turns in a match (if they are specified).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows them to know the number of turns in a match (unless the match has a probabilistic ending).
```

highly in standard tournaments as well. Similarly the fourth ranked player,
Evolved FSM 16 Noise 05, was
trained for noisy tournaments yet performs well in standard tournaments.
Figure~\ref{fig:std_results} shows that these strategies typically perform
well in any standard tournament in which they participate.

In the case of noisy tournaments with \(p_n < 0.1\) the top performed strategies
include strategies specifically designed for noisy tournaments. These are DBS,
Evolved FSM 16 Noise 05, Evolved ANN 5 Noise 05, PSO Gambler 2 2 2 Noise 05 and
Omega Tit For Tat~\cite{kendall2007iterated}. Omega TFT, another strategy designed
to break the deadlocking cycles of CD and DC that TFT can fall into in noisy
environments, places 10th. The rest of the top ranks are
occupied by strategies which performed well in standard tournaments and
deterministic strategies such as Spiteful Tit For Tat~\cite{prison}, Level
Punisher~\cite{Eckhart2015}, Eugine Nier~\cite{lesswrong}. Similarly to standard
tournaments, the successful strategies in this given setting performed well
overall in the tournaments they participated in,
Figure~\ref{fig:noise_subset_results}.

> In comparison, the performance the top ranked strategies in noisy environments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In comparison, the performance of the top ranked strategies in noisy environments
```

when \(p_n\in [0, 1]\) is bimodal. The top strategies include strategies which
decide their actions based on the cooperation to defection ratio, such as
ShortMem~\cite{Andre2013}, Grumpy~\cite{axelrodproject} and
e~\cite{axelrodproject}, and the Retaliate strategies which are designed to

> defect if the opponent has tricked them more often than x\% of the times that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defect if the opponent has tricked them more often than a given percentage of the times that
```

    \centering
    \resizebox{.30\textwidth}{!}{
    \input{performance_merged_table.tex}}
    \caption{Top performances over all the tournaments. The top ranks include
    strategies that have been previously mentioned. The set of Retaliate
    strategies occupy the top spots followed by BackStabber and DoubleCrosser.
    The distributions of the Retaliate strategies have no statistical
    difference. PSO Gambler and Evolved HMM 5 are trained strategies introduced
    in~\cite{Harper2017} and Nice Meta Winner and NMWE Memory One are strategies
    based on teams. Grudger is a strategy from Axelrod's original tournament and
    Forgetful Fool Me Once is based on the same approach as
    Grudger.}\label{table:overall_results}
\end{table}

\begin{figure}[!htbp]
        \centering
        \includegraphics[width=.65\textwidth]{../images/performance_merged.pdf}
        \caption{\(r\) distributions for best performed strategies in the data set~\cite{data}.
        A lower value of \(\bar{r}\) corresponds to a more successful
        performance.}
        \label{fig:overall_results}
\end{figure}

On the whole, the analysis of this manuscript has shown that:

\begin{itemize}

>     \item In standard tournaments the dominating strategies were clever

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item In standard tournaments the dominating strategies were 
```

    ranked strategies were strategies based on the behaviour of others.
    \item From the collection of strategies considered here,  no strategy can be
    consistently successful in noisy environments, except if the value of noise
    is constrained to less than a 0.1.
\end{itemize}

Though there is not a single strategy that repeatably outranks all others in any
of the distinct tournament types, or even across the tournaments type, there
are specific types of strategies have been repeatably ranked in the top ranks.
These have been strategies that have been trained, strategies that retailiate,
and strategies that would adapt their behaviour based on preassigned rules
to achieve the highest outcome. These results contradict some of Axelrod's suggestions,
and more specifically, the suggestions `Do not be clever' and `Do not be envious'.
The features and properties contributing a strategy's success are further
explored in Section~\ref{section:evaluation_of_performance}.

\section{Evaluation of performance}\label{section:evaluation_of_performance}

Now we examine performance of the strategies based on features of strategies described in

> Table~\ref{table:manual_features}. These feature are measures regarding a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table~\ref{table:manual_features}. These features are measures regarding a
```

    \bottomrule
        \end{tabular}}
    \end{center}
    \caption{The features which are included in the performance evaluation
    analysis. Stochastic, makes use of length and makes use of game are APL
    classifiers that determine whether a strategy is stochastic or deterministic,
    whether it makes use of the number of turns or the game's payoffs. The
    memory usage is calculated as the number of turns the strategy considers to
    make an action (which is specified in the APL) divided by the number of

>     turns. The SSE (introduced in~\cite{Knight2019}) shows how close a strategy
>     is to behaving as a ZDs, and subsequently, in an extortionate way. The
>     method identifies the ZDs closest to a given strategy and calculates the
>     algebraic distance between them, defined as SSE. A SSE value of 1 indicates
>     no extortionate behaviour at all whereas a value of 0 indicates that a
>     strategy is behaving a ZDs. The rest of the features considered are the $CC$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    turns. The SSE (introduced in~\cite{Knight2019}) shows how close a strategy
    is to behaving as a ZDs, and subsequently, in an extortionate way. The
    method identifies the ZDs closest to a given strategy and calculates the
    algebraic distance between them as the sum of squared error (SSE). A SSE value of 1 indicates
    no extortionate behaviour at all whereas a value of 0 indicates that a
    strategy is behaving as a ZDs. The rest of the features considered are the $CC$
```

    to $C$, $CD$ to $C$, $DC$ to $C$, and $DD$ to $C$ rates as well as
    cooperating ratio of a strategy, the minimum (\(C_{min}\)), maximum
    (\(C_{max}\)), mean (\(C_{mean}\)) and median (\(C_{median}\)) cooperating
    ratios of each tournament.}
    \label{table:manual_features}
\end{table}

> The memory usage of strategies with an infinite memory size, for example Evolved
> FSM 16 Noise 05, is equal to 1. Otherwise the memory usage is the number of
> rounds of play used by the strategy divided by the number of turns in each match.
> For example, Winner12 uses the previous two rounds of play, and if participating in a
> participated in a tournament where $n$ was 100 the memory usage would be 2/100.
> Note that for tournaments with a probabilistic
> ending the number of turns was not collected, so the memory usage feature is not
> used for probabilistic ending tournaments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory usage of strategies is the number of
rounds of play used by the strategy divided by the number of turns in each match. 
For example, Winner12 uses the previous two rounds of play, and if participating in a
participated in a match with 100 turns, the memory usage would be 2/100.
For strategies with an infinite memory size, for example Evolved
FSM 16 Noise 05, is equal to 1.
Note that for tournaments with a probabilistic
ending the number of turns was not collected, so the memory usage feature is not
used for probabilistic ending tournaments.
```

that the winners in noisy tournaments cooperated less than 35\% of the time
and in probabilistic ending tournaments less than 10\%.
In noisy probabilistic ending tournaments and over all the tournaments' results,
the only features that had a moderate effect are $C_r/C_{\text{mean}},
C_r/C_{\text{max}}$ and $C_r$. In such environments cooperative behaviour
appears to be punished less than in noisy and probabilistic ending
tournaments.

Moreover, the manner in which a strategy achieves a given cooperation rate
relative to the tournament population average is important. Playing a strategy
that randomly cooperates with $C_{\text{mean}}$ is unlikely to be as effective as it will
randomly have cooperations matched with defections. In contrast, TFT naturally
achieves a cooperation rate near $C_{\text{mean}}$ by virtue of copying its opponent's
last move while also minimizing instances where it is exploited by an opponent
(cooperating while the opponent defects), at least in non-noisy tournaments.
\footnote{This also explains why Tit For N Tats does not fare well -- it fails
to achieve the proper cooperation ratio.}

> TFT forces the opponent to pay back the (C, D) round with a (D, C) round before

Reviewer: We need to be consistent in presentation of this. @Nikoleta-v3 does this need to be `\((C, D)\) round with a \((D, C)\)`.

(I don't care what we do, let's just make sure we're consistant).

returning to mutual cooperation. This explains why TFT performed well
in Axelrod's original tournaments as most strategies submitted to those tournaments
were typically cooperative and relatively few strategies used an easily exploitable

> pattern. TFT does not appear in the top ranks in
> these tournaments because it is too nice. Strategies like Grudger will always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pattern. TFT does not appear in the top ranks in
 tournaments with more aggressive strategies because it is too nice. Strategies like Grudger will always
```

defect after a fixed number of opponent defections, which allows them to
effectively exploit strategies like Alternator or stochastic strategies that
have a non-zero chance of cooperating after mutual defection, which TFT will
not do. Moreover in a noisy environment these strategies will naturally tend
toward always defecting, leading them to exploit strategies like Cooperator. In
such a scenario the noisy environment effectively voids Axelrod's rule to be nice,
allowing strategies to attempt exploitation, whereas in a noise-free environment,
exploitation is risky because several strategies exhibit a Grudger-like behavior,
reducing the overall value in attempting to exploit strategies like Cooperator.

> Similarly, these results suggest an explanation regarding the perhaps intuitively unexpected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, these results suggest an explanation regarding the intuitively unexpected
```

effectiveness of memory one strategies historically. Given that among the important

> features associated to success are the relative cooperation rate to the population

Reviewer: ```suggestion
features associated with success are the relative cooperation rate to the population
```

average and the four memory-one probabilities of cooperating conditional on the
previous round of play, all five features can be optimized by a memory one
strategy such as TFT. Usage of more history becomes valuable when there are

> exploitable opponent patterns, indicated by the importance of SSE as a feature,
> that the first-approximation provided by a memory one strategy is no longer
> sufficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exploitable opponent patterns. This is indicated by the importance of SSE as a feature,
showing that the first-approximation provided by a memory one strategy is no longer
sufficient.
```

> 

Reviewer: I didn't really like the two paragraphs above (lines 729 to 762), I found them quite long winded and tricky to follow. If @Nikoleta-v3 and @marcharper you're both happy with them that's ok with me but if we could perhaps make them a bit more "to the point"? (Perhaps fragmenting long sentences could be sufficient.)

\begin{figure}[!htbp]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=.57\textwidth]{../images/c_r_winners_tournaments.pdf}
    \caption{$C_r$ distributions of the winners in noisy and in probabilistic
    ending tournaments.}\label{fig:c_r_distributions}
\end{figure}

A multivariate linear regression has been fitted to model the relationship between
the features and the normalised rank. Based on the graphical representation of
the correlation matrices given in Appendix~\ref{app:correlations} several of the

> features are highly correlated. Highly correlated features have been removed
> before fitting the linear regression model. The features included are given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
features are highly correlated and have been removed
before fitting the linear regression model. The features included are given
```

by Table~\ref{table:linear_regression} alongside their corresponding \(p\) values
in the distinct tournaments and their regression coefficients.

\newcolumntype{g}{>{\columncolor{Gray}}c}
\begin{table}[h]
    \begin{center}
\resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{
    \input{regression_table.tex}}
    \end{center}
    \caption{Results of multivariate linear regressions with \(r\) as the dependent variable.
    \(R\) squared is reported for each model.}
    \label{table:linear_regression}
\end{table}

A multivariate linear regression has also be fitted on the median score. The
coefficients and \(p\) values of the features can be found in

> Appendix~\ref{app:regression_median_score}. The results of the two methods
> are in agreement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Appendix~\ref{app:regression_median_score}. This approach leads to similar conclusions.
```

The feature \(C_{r} / C_{\text{mean}}\) has a statistically significant effect
across all models and a high regression coefficient. It has both a positive and
negative impact on the normalised rank depending on the environment. For
standard tournaments, Figure~\ref{fig:discussion_standard} gives the
distributions of several features for the winners of standard tournaments. The
\(C_{r} / C_{\text{mean}}\) distribution of the winner is also given in
Figure~\ref{fig:discussion_standard}. A value of \(C_r / C_{\text{mean}} = 1\)
implies that the cooperating ratio of the winner was the same as the mean
cooperating ratio of the tournament, and in standard tournaments, the median is
1. Therefore, an effective strategy in standard tournaments was the mean
cooperator of its respective tournament.

The distributions of SSE and \(CC\) to \(D\) rate for the winners of standard
tournaments are also given in Figure~\ref{fig:discussion_standard}. The SSE

> distributions for the winners indicate that they strategy's behaved in ZD way in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
distributions for the winners indicate that the strategy behaved in a ZD way in
```

        for the winners of noisy probabilistic ending tournaments.}
        \label{fig:discussion_probend_noisy}
\end{figure}

Further statistically significant features with strong effects include \(C_r /
C_{\text{min}}\), \(C_r / C_{\text{max}}\), \(C_{\text{min}}\) and
\(C_{\text{max}}\). These add more emphasis on how important it is for a  a
strategy to adapt to its environment. Finally, the features number of turns,
repetitions and the probabilities of noise and the game ending had no
significant effects based on the multivariate regression models.

\begin{figure}[!htbp]
    \centering
        \centering
        \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{../images/entire_data_discussion.pdf}
        \caption{Distributions of \(C_r / C_{\text{mean}}\), SSE and \(CD\) to \(C\) ratio
        for the winners over the tournaments of the entire data set.}
        \label{fig:discussion_entire_data}
\end{figure}

A third method that evaluates the importance of the features in
Table~\ref{table:manual_features} using clustering and random forests can be found in
the Appendix~\ref{app:clustering}. The results uphold the outcomes of the

> correlation and multivariate regression methods. It also evaluates the effects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
correlation and multivariate regression. It also evaluates the effects
```

> of the classifiers stochastic, make use of game, and make use of length which
> have not been evaluated by the methods above because there are binary variables.
> The results imply that they have no significant effect on a strategy's
> performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the whether or not a strategy is stochastic, makes use of the knowledge of the utility values, or makes use of match length. These were not evaluated by the methods above because there are binary variables.
The results showed that they have no significant effect on a strategy's
performance.
```

settings, and these were also studied individually. In standard tournaments
complex strategies trained using reinforcement learning ranked in the top spots.
Some of these strategies ranked again in the top spots in probabilistic
ending tournaments when a \(p_e\) of less 0.1 was considered and in noisy tournaments
when \(p_n\) was less than 0.1. In probabilistic
ending tournaments \(p_e\) was designed to vary between 0 and 1. It was demonstrated
that for values larger than 0.1, as stated in the Folk Theorem, defecting strategies
were winning the tournaments because there was a high likelihood of the game
ending in the next turn. In tournaments with noise the median ranks of the top
15 strategies had the highest values and the \(r\) distributions were bimodal.
The top rank strategies were performing both well and bad, and this indicates
that in noisy tournaments where the noise can vary substantially,
there were no strategies that can guarantee winning across a range of noise.
However, if the probability of noise was constrained at 0.1 then strategies
designed for noisy tournaments indeed performed well.

So what is the best way of playing the IPD? And is there a single dominant

> strategy for the IPD? There was not a single strategy within the collection of the
> \numberofstrategies strategies, that has managed to perform well in all the
> tournaments variations it competed in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strategy for the IPD? 

There was not a single strategy within the collection of the
\numberofstrategies strategies, that has managed to perform well in all the
tournaments variations it competed in.
```

Even if on average a strategy ranked highly in a specific environment it did not
guarantee its success over the different tournament types. However, the results
of sections~\ref{section:top_performances}
and~\ref{section:evaluation_of_performance} have demonstrated that there are

> properties associated with the success of strategies. A few the properties that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
properties associated with the success of strategies. A few of the properties that
```

have been identified by this manuscript's analysis contradict the properties of

> Axelrod~\cite{Axelrod1981}. Namely, in Section~\ref{section:top_performances} it
> was shown that trained strategies and strategies that decided their actions
> based on pre-designed strategies to maximise their utility dominated several
> tournaments across tournament types, hinting that successful IPD strategies are
> often clever or more complex than simple strategies like TFT. Most of the

Reviewer: I do not understand this sentence.

Would the following have the same effect:

```suggestion
Axelrod~\cite{Axelrod1981}. Namely, in Section~\ref{section:top_performances} it
was shown that trained strategies dominated several
tournaments across tournament types, hinting that successful IPD strategies are
often clever or more complex than simple strategies like TFT. Most of the
```

successful strategies highlighted
in~Section~\ref{section:top_performances} were strategies that begin with
cooperation.

Furthermore, in Section~\ref{section:top_performances}
and~\ref{section:evaluation_of_performance} it was shown that envious strategies
performed well. Though these were not the most envious strategies in the
tournaments (ZDs were included), these strategies benefited by being a bit
envious. From Section~\ref{section:evaluation_of_performance} it was concluded
that there is a significant importance in adapting to the environment, and more
specifically in this work, to the mean cooperator. This section also
demonstrated that a strategy should reciprocate, as suggested by Axelrod, but in
some environments, such as standard and noisy, it should relax its readiness to
do so.

> Thus, the five properties successful strategies need to have in a IPD competition
> are: be nice, be provocable and contrite, be a little envious, be clever, and adapt to the
> environment (including the population of strategies).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, the five properties successful strategies need to have in a IPD competition
are: 

\begin{itemize}
\item be nice, 
    \item be provocable and contrite, 
    \item be a little envious, 
    \item be clever, 
    \item adapt to theenvironment (including the population of strategies).
\end{itemize}
```

do so.

Thus, the five properties successful strategies need to have in a IPD competition
are: 

\begin{itemize}
\item be nice, 
    \item be provocable and contrite, 
    \item be a little envious, 
    \item be clever, 

>     \item adapt to theenvironment (including the population of strategies).

Reviewer 2: need a space here
